docs/fields/numbers.rst, before:

###############
 Number Fields
###############

Interact with different kinds of numbers, with configurable options to support a wide range of data
formats.

*********
 Integer
*********

The ``Integer`` field handles integer values with configurable size, signedness, and endianness.

.. code:: python

   age = Integer(size=1)
   birth_year = Integer(size=2, endianness="<")

Parameters
==========

-  **size**: Number of bytes (1, 2, 4, or 8)

-  **signed**: Whether to interpret as signed integer (default: False)

-  **endianness**: Byte order

   -  ``'<'`` for little-endian (least significant byte first)
   -  ``'>'`` for big-endian (most significant byte first)
   -  (default: little-endian)

*******
 Float
*******

The ``Float`` field handles converting floating-point values to/from binary data using IEEE 754
representation.

.. code:: python

   price = Float()

Parameters
==========

-  **size**: Number of bytes

   -  2 (half precision)
   -  4 (single precision)
   -  8 (double precision)
   -  (default: single precision)

Commit message:

Add details on field options that can be specified on the structure

docs/fields/numbers.rst, after:

###############
 Number Fields
###############

Interact with different kinds of numbers, with configurable options to support a wide range of data
formats.

*********
 Integer
*********

The ``Integer`` field handles integer values with configurable size, signedness, and endianness.

.. code:: python

   age = Integer(size=1)
   birth_year = Integer(size=2, endianness="<")

Parameters
==========

-  **size**: Number of bytes (1, 2, 4, or 8)

-  **signed**: Whether to interpret as signed integer (default: False)

-  **endianness**: Byte order *Can be overridden at the structure level.*

   -  ``'<'`` for little-endian (least significant byte first)
   -  ``'>'`` for big-endian (most significant byte first)
   -  (default: little-endian)

*******
 Float
*******

The ``Float`` field handles converting floating-point values to/from binary data using IEEE 754
representation.

.. code:: python

   price = Float()

Parameters
==========

-  **size**: Number of bytes

   -  2 (half precision)
   -  4 (single precision)
   -  8 (double precision)
   -  (default: single precision)
