docs/fields/text.rst, before:

#############
 Text Fields
#############

Read and write Unicode text with configurable character encodings and other considerations. Strings
can come in varying lengths, which can be stored in a few different ways, so there are multiple text
fields to handle different behaviors.

************
 Shared API
************

All text fields share a common API that's independent of how the bytes are arranged.

Parameters
==========

-  **encoding**: Character encoding to use (e.g., 'utf-8', 'ascii', 'latin-1'). These match Python's
   native encodings, and there is no default.

Character vs Byte Length
========================

Most of the following fields also have a ``size`` parameter, which, like all other fields, refers to
the number of bytes that are used to encode the value in a data stream. For many text encodings and
termination styles, this can be very different from the number of characters in the decoded string.

.. code:: python

   field = FixedLengthString(size=5, encoding="utf-8")

   # ASCII: 1 byte per character
   field.pack("hello")  # b'hello' (5 bytes, which can be stored successfully)

   # UTF-8: Variable bytes per character
   field.pack("héllo")  # b'h\xc3\xa9llo' (6 bytes, which would exceed the size limit)

*******************
 FixedLengthString
*******************

Strings that are always stored in a pre-defined amount of bytes, regardless of the length of the
string. The returned value can never be longer than the size of the field, but it can be smaller.

Additional Parameters
=====================

-  **size**: Maximum size in bytes for the string data.

-  **padding**: Byte to use to pad shorter strings to fit the full length of the field. When reading
   from a data stream, this padding will automatically be stripped out, and when writing to a
   stream, it will be added as necessary. (default: ``b'\x00'``)

.. code:: python

   FixedLengthString(size=20, encoding="ascii")

********************
 LenghIndexedString
********************

Strings where the length is stored as a separate field before the string data itself. This is
commonly known as a Pascal string format, where a length prefix indicates how many bytes follow for
the actual string content.

Additional Parameters
=====================

-  **size**: A field representing the size of the string to read. To allow for that size to be
   stored in different ways, this can be any field that yields a Python `int`. For example, a 2-byte
   length prefix can be accessed with an ``Integer(size=2)`` field.

.. code:: python

   from steel import Integer

   LenghIndexedString(size=Integer(size=2), encoding="utf-8")

.. tip::

   ``PascalString`` is provided an alias for ``LenghIndexedString``, for authors more familiar with
   that name.

******************
 TerminatedString
******************

Strings that are terminated by a specific value, rather than having a predetermined length. The
string continues until the terminator byte is encountered in the data stream.

.. code:: python

   TerminatedString(encoding="ascii")

Additional Parameters
=====================

-  **terminator**: Byte sequence that marks the end of the string data. (default: ``b'\x00'``)

The terminator must be exactly one byte long. When reading, the terminator byte is consumed from the
stream but not included in the returned string value. When writing, the terminator is automatically
appended to the encoded string data.

Example Usage
=============

.. code:: python

   TerminatedString(encoding="ascii", terminator=b";")

.. tip::

   ``CString`` is provided an alias for ``TerminatedString``, for authors more familiar with that
   name.

Commit message:

Add details on field options that can be specified on the structure

docs/fields/text.rst, after:

#############
 Text Fields
#############

Read and write Unicode text with configurable character encodings and other considerations. Strings
can come in varying lengths, which can be stored in a few different ways, so there are multiple text
fields to handle different behaviors.

************
 Shared API
************

All text fields share a common API that's independent of how the bytes are arranged.

Parameters
==========

-  **encoding**: Character encoding to use (default: ``'utf8'``). These match Python's native
   encodings. *Can be overridden at the structure level.*

Character vs Byte Length
========================

Most of the following fields also have a ``size`` parameter, which, like all other fields, refers to
the number of bytes that are used to encode the value in a data stream. For many text encodings and
termination styles, this can be very different from the number of characters in the decoded string.

.. code:: python

   field = FixedLengthString(size=5, encoding="utf-8")

   # ASCII: 1 byte per character
   field.pack("hello")  # b'hello' (5 bytes, which can be stored successfully)

   # UTF-8: Variable bytes per character
   field.pack("héllo")  # b'h\xc3\xa9llo' (6 bytes, which would exceed the size limit)

*******************
 FixedLengthString
*******************

Strings that are always stored in a pre-defined amount of bytes, regardless of the length of the
string. The returned value can never be longer than the size of the field, but it can be smaller.

Additional Parameters
=====================

-  **size**: Maximum size in bytes for the string data.

-  **padding**: Byte to use to pad shorter strings to fit the full length of the field. When reading
   from a data stream, this padding will automatically be stripped out, and when writing to a
   stream, it will be added as necessary. (default: ``b'\x00'``) *Can be overridden at the structure
   level.*

.. code:: python

   FixedLengthString(size=20, encoding="ascii")

********************
 LenghIndexedString
********************

Strings where the length is stored as a separate field before the string data itself. This is
commonly known as a Pascal string format, where a length prefix indicates how many bytes follow for
the actual string content.

Additional Parameters
=====================

-  **size**: A field representing the size of the string to read. To allow for that size to be
   stored in different ways, this can be any field that yields a Python `int`. For example, a 2-byte
   length prefix can be accessed with an ``Integer(size=2)`` field.

.. code:: python

   from steel import Integer

   LenghIndexedString(size=Integer(size=2), encoding="utf-8")

.. tip::

   ``PascalString`` is provided an alias for ``LenghIndexedString``, for authors more familiar with
   that name.

******************
 TerminatedString
******************

Strings that are terminated by a specific value, rather than having a predetermined length. The
string continues until the terminator byte is encountered in the data stream.

.. code:: python

   TerminatedString(encoding="ascii")

Additional Parameters
=====================

-  **terminator**: Byte sequence that marks the end of the string data. (default: ``b'\x00'``) *Can
   be overridden at the structure level.*

The terminator must be exactly one byte long. When reading, the terminator byte is consumed from the
stream but not included in the returned string value. When writing, the terminator is automatically
appended to the encoded string data.

Example Usage
=============

.. code:: python

   TerminatedString(encoding="ascii", terminator=b";")

.. tip::

   ``CString`` is provided an alias for ``TerminatedString``, for authors more familiar with that
   name.
